DAN GILBERT: Its a
desire we all share.
"To lead a rich,
fulfilling, happy life."
But you cant always
get what you want.
ELIZABETH GILBERT: Why are we so
fickle? Why is it that one day
the things that make us happy
the next day bring us misery?
DAN GILBERT: This emotional
life is a roller coaster...
taking us from the
heights of ecstasy
to the depths of despair
and every place between.
KATIE COURIC: All
emotions have a role
in a healthy life;
were not automatons.
"Im Dan Gilbert,
and in this series,"
Im going to introduce you
"to everyday people who are
searching for happiness,"
as well as to the scientists
and clinicians who are
trying to help them find it.
BARBARA ROTHBAUM:
What Ive taken away
is the resilience
of the human spirit.
It is just amazing what we
can go through and be okay.
WARREN KING: At first I
thought I was going crazy--
"the dreams, the nightmares--
but Im not letting it beat me."
What more can I say?
Im a happy camper.
GILBERT: Well see how our
greatest source of happiness
lies in the people around us.
SETH POLLAK: The lesson weve
learned is that a basic need
"for human beings is
love, is companionship."
GILBERT: Well see
what happiness is...
what causes it...
and why we look for it
in all the wrong places.
WOMAN: I used to think that
things would make me happy.
"Or money, success."
Im realizing now that
thats not the fact.
Happiness comes from within.
"GILBERT: But next, well explore
the obstacles to happiness."
"Emotions such as fear,
sadness and anger."
JOHN McENROE: Have I lost it
to the point where I did
feel like Ive lost it? Yeah.
I went through like six or
seven years of real depression.
I just was never quite
given the right pill.
"GILBERT: Asking why we have
them, why we need them"
and how we can all keep
them under control.
"WOMAN: I remember
Caitlin screaming,"
"""You dont understand
how horrible it is to be"
"""caught in this
brain that doesnt work"
"and I want you to fix this."""
"GILBERT: Coming up,
""Facing Our Fears"" on
This Emotional Life."
Captioning sponsored
by THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING
and VIEWERS LIKE YOU
This program was made possible
by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to
your PBS station from:
GILBERT: Coney Island
is an amusement park.
Imagine that.
An entire park dedicated to
nothing more than a feeling.
And theres a whole lot of
feeling going on around here.
"People are happy and relaxed,"
"excited and frightened,"
"exhausted and relieved,"
"and yes, sometimes
even amused."
"Human emotions are
a rollercoaster,"
taking each of us from delight
to despair and back again.
We like the ups much
more than the downs.
"But the fact is that emotions
like anger, fear and sadness"
have a critical role
to play in our lives.
Negative emotions are
both our best friend
"and our worst enemy, and
science is beginning"
to help us understand how
that paradox is possible.
McENROE: In the 80s
there was a poll done in
one of the newspapers.
"The most heinous, you know,"
"people in the 20th
century, you know."
It was like Jack the
Ripper was one...
"I was two, Charles
Manson was three."
"You know, I mean it was like,"
"""Wait a second, okay, I
yelled at an umpire, okay?"
"I didnt mutilate 40
people or whatever."""
ALANIS MORISSETTE:
Anger feels hot.
"Even talking about anger,
my whole rib cage is warm."
My legs are mobilized.
Its the fight.
I feel my jaw getting clenched.
I want to punch something.
"You know, I-I used to be the
kind of guy who, I would,"
I would scream on the street.
I was screaming
on street corners.
"When, when I asked somebody the
time and they go, (mutters)"
"You know, I would scream,
Id get in fights, you know?"
MARY MOLINA: I was in a bar.
And I was with my girlfriend.
"Across the way, there
were three huge dudes"
and they were there chilling
and sort of saying things
amongst themselves about her.
"And um, so, you know, that
really got to me to the point"
"where I got up off my chair
and I walked over to them,"
"and then in a sort of
methodical sort of way,"
"you know, sort of
start picking at them."
"""Youre a fat piece of lardass,
you rich (bleep) mamas boy."
"Youre being a real (bleeps)."""
Do you understand that?
"When I want to hurt somebody,"
Im not thinking about
how could they hurt me.
Im thinking about
how angry I am.
It just... it just drives you.
GILBERT: Mary is
a Los Angeles-based
writer and filmmaker
who knows what its like to
be in the grip of anger.
Para que es esto?
"I was born in
Barenquia, Colombia,"
which is on the northern
coast of South America.
My family moved here
when I was ten years old.
My father was very frustrated.
He would do things
like punch walls
and kick doors down
and things like that.
He was really tense.
He was really angry.
"By the time that
I was like 14, 15,"
I was really reacting.
I was so angry at him
that I wanted to...
"uh... I almost kind of
wanted to fight him,"
to see who would win.
"Eventually it sort
of progressed, uh,"
"just sort of like a general
anger towards people,"
"towards things, towards, uh,"
a world that didnt
understand me.
"MAN: You could follow
through a little more, too."
On the right or on
the left or on both?
Yeah. On the right. On
the right. On the right?
"Yeah, especially. Okay."
"When I get into arguments,
get into fights,"
I only see that person
or that thing in front of
me that I want to attack.
"And then Im acutely
assessing the situation,"
"but only for one purpose,
and thats to win."
GILBERT: When animals are
threatened they experience
a surge of hormones
that make them ready to
attack or to retreat.
Human animals are no exception.
Our fight-or-flight response
is crucial for our survival.
ROBERT ALLAN: Anger
can feel exhilarating
because what we do is trigger
the fight-or-flight response.
We secrete lots of adrenaline
to power our large muscles
in the event that we have to
fight or flee from the predator.
"We secrete cortisol,"
which heightens our auditory
and visual sensitivities.
"We stop digesting lunch,"
because who needs
to digest lunch
if youre about to become lunch?
"Now, that response
is very appropriate"
when were dealing with
life-threatening danger.
"However, the Yellow Cab driver
that cut you off in traffic"
comes to supplant the
saber-toothed tiger
"that our ancestors, millennia
ago, were dealing with."
"And when we look at what
happens physiologically,"
we stay in this heightened state
for quite some period of time.
"And, because were dealing
with fight or flight,"
were dealing with impulses
that are very strong.
(people cheering)
"(cheering, applause)"
"GILBERT: The
emotions associated
with fight or flight,"
"emotions like anger and fear,"
are triggered deep
inside our brain.
"MAN: Five, four,
three, two, one, tug."
"GILBERT: And when we
try to control them,
we start a tug-of-war"
between our brains
oldest and newest parts.
"(cheering, applause)"
While ancient structures
like the amygdala
"respond to threats by trying
to turn our anger or fear on,"
"its newer structures, such
as the prefrontal cortex--"
the thinking part of our brain--
that try to turn them off.
Its the tug-of-war
between these two systems that
gives rise to our emotions.
"At New York University,"
neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux
has studied how the amygdala
and the cortex shape our
emotional responses.
"You know more about the
amygdala than anybody alive,"
and you still cant
control yours.
No. Why?
"Now, theres an
interesting thing again"
that has to do with the
wiring of the brain.
"So, if we could
look at it here..."
"So, this is the human brain,"
"inside a skull,"
"and the prefrontal cortex
is here in the front,"
right behind your forehead.
And that is the newest
part of the brain.
"This is where we
make our decisions,"
"this is where we
plan for the future,"
"um, and strategize."
The lateral prefrontal
cortex has no connectivity
with the amygdala.
The amygdala has super highways
to talk to the cortex.
But the prefrontal cortex
has only back roads
and side streets to
get to the amygdala.
"And therefore, it is unable
to tell the amygdala,"
"""Cool it."""
But why are there
no connections?
"Were in the process of
evolving as we speak,"
and those connections
have not been put in yet.
This thing was built
"to do fancy things
cognitively,"
not necessarily to
control our emotions.
(thunder rumbling)
GILBERT: The fact that
we are not designed
to have complete control
over our emotions
can have some unfortunate
consequences.
"MOLINA: I was in such
a deep, dark place"
that I couldnt even
really see myself.
"Like, I had become
this, like..."
muddled thing of a person.
I was so sad.
I was so angry.
I couldnt get beyond it.
I realized I had to do something
when I hit rock bottom.
(indistinct chattering)
One of my friends
invited me to a party.
"And I was having a great time,"
"but, uh, because
Im a control freak,"
I decided that I wanted
to change the song.
I wanted to go over to the
iPod and change the song.
"So, the guy whose party it was"
"came over to me, and hes
like, ""What are you doing?"""
And I... boom.
"I just went off. Im like, ""Who
are you?"" And he was like,"
"""Its my party, and Im
gonna play what I want."""
"Im like, ""Youre a (bleep)
selfish (bleep)."""
"And I just slapped
him across the face,"
and his glasses went
flying across the room.
"Um, and so, at that moment,"
it was like everything
sort of fell away.
You know what I mean?
"Like, there were at
least another 20,"
"30 people in the room, and
I could see none of them."
"They just turned
into like this blur,"
and all I could
see was this guy.
"He grabbed a chunk of my hair,"
"and he hung onto
it really tight,"
so I just started kicking him.
"I was just, like,
laying on him."
"I was like, ""Let
go, let go, let go."""
"I kept on saying,
""Let go, let go."""
I just kept on kicking him.
"Just kicking him and kicking
him and kicking him,"
"um, until he finally let go."
And at that point...
(sighs)
I just started crying.
You know?
"And, uh, it was like
everything became real again."
"And all the people,"
"um, were there, and
they were looking at me"
"with such, like,
shock and awe."
And I...
I felt horrible...
...that I... that I did it.
Thats what hurts me.
"And that I shouldnt, you know?"
That it goes against my values.
"It goes against
who I am, you know?"
Um...
Thats... thats...
thats what hurts me.
ALLAN: Think about what
happens after an argument
that was really intense.
People feel terrible.
"Oftentimes, they feel
depressed afterwards."
Its not a good
long-term solution.
"ADAM GOPNIK: Anger, uh...
its not a helpful emotion."
Its not always an
appropriate emotion.
"And, in the cases
in my own life"
when Ive allowed it free range--
Ive allowed it action--
Ive always regretted it after.
I dont... I cant think of a time
when Ive seen my own anger
as something that was
constructive for me
"or, uh, useful in the world."
But Ive noticed where
my anger comes out
in subtle or not so
subtle ways and how its...
"its wrought a lot of havoc in
my personal life, so, um..."
including the... the anger
that Ive turned toward me.
McENROE: Have I lost it
to the point where I did feel
like Ive lost it? Yeah.
Its not easy to feel
like you made an ass
"out of yourself, perhaps,
and get through that."
But people do...
I think people make mistakes
every day of their life.
GILBERT: Can we
outsmart our own brains?
Can we learn to
control our emotions?
Stanford psychologist
James Gross
has spent his career studying
"what scientists call
""emotion regulation."""
"GROSS: For me,
emotion regulation"
is really the science
of understanding
"how we can modify
our emotions,"
"harness their energy, so
that we can direct them"
in ways that we wish to go.
"So, for me, emotion regulation"
"isnt turning down or
turning off all emotions,"
"because emotions, I think,
are often incredibly helpful"
and are what make us who we are.
"But I think, at times,
its great to have"
a set of tools that we
can avail ourselves of
so that we can change the course
of the emotions
that were having.
"GILBERT: To test his theory,
Gross asked about 100 women"
to take part in an experiment.
Each woman was wired
up to a machine
"so that researchers could
measure her heart rate,"
pulse and perspiration--
all physiological indicators
of emotional arousal.
"First, the women
were asked to recall"
a recent incident that
had made them angry
"and to think about the
incident again and again,"
"to keep turning it
over in their minds,"
to consider and
reconsider every detail.
"Scientists call this
""rumination."""
"To Mary, this way of thinking
came quite naturally."
MOLINA: I didnt understand
"why it was so easy for
me to, like, just..."
go into these ranting raves
"and just become so obsessed
on this thing, okay."
"""You... you
forgot to call me."
"""Why did you
forget to call me?"
"""You shouldve called me."
"""I dont understand."
"""Okay, you were busy,
but I re... I re..."
"I reminded you
several times."""
"You become fixated on these
things, you know, like..."
and you dont take a
moment to breathe.
"GILBERT: In the next
phase of the experiment,"
the women were
again asked to think
"about the incident
that made them angry,"
but this time to
try to visualize it
as a neutral observer
or from the perspective
of the other person.
"This is a technique
that scientists call
""reappraisal."""
"When the subjects ruminated,"
their cardiovascular
system went into overdrive.
"When they reappraised,"
"their bodies became calmer,
and their anger diminished."
One of the things that
people for a very long time
"have, uh, repeated
again and again is that,"
"actually, theres
an important role"
"for thinking in
emotions, and if you can"
"change the way you think, you
can change the way you feel."
GILBERT: Marys introduction
to emotion regulation
came through a therapist
who helped her explore
the roots of her anger
and suggested ways she
could better control it.
MOLINA: One of the things that
I have sort of grown to accept
"in the last couple of years,"
"especially going
through therapy,"
"is that I have to stop myself
and just take a breath,"
and then also think about the...
the person in front of me.
"To, like, really see them as
someone who makes mistakes,"
and maybe didnt
say what they mean
or maybe had a rough
day at work today.
"Youre in the middle
of an argument,"
"and youre so riled
up, and youre so ready"
to fight for something
incredibly stupid.
"Uh, that feels,
like, primordial."
Its hard to think about
the people around you
and how its
affecting them. Um...
Have you tried to put any
of this into practice--
"like, taking it out for a
test drive, this advice?"
Yeah. Yeah. And...?
Did it work?
"Its hard, hard work,"
but it works.
You practice.
"You know, its like anything."
"Its like learning an
instrument-- you practice,"
"and you learn some basic
tools, and you always go back"
to those tools when
all things fail.
"Back in the day, you know,
I had to go to therapy,"
"and I found it... it
saved me cause I was very,"
"you know, kind of
self-destructive."
I was always acting out.
Four years of that twice a
week made a huge difference.
ELIZABETH GILBERT:
Its a wonderful thing
to... to be able to go
to somebody who you...
"who didnt raise you, who
youre not married to,"
"who you dont have a 15-year
friendship relationship with,"
and... and be able to tell them
what you secretly are
longing for and needing
without feeling that
youre going to be judged
"or, um... or that youre going"
to hurt their feelings
if this comes out.
"So, by being able to unload
these feelings to this doctor--"
"and I did, I told
her everything that was
making me feel crummy,"
"uh, and we discussed it--"
"when I walked out
of there, you know,"
maybe between the
time I left her office
"and into my car, I
was floating on air."
GILBERT: Psychotherapy has been
with us for more than a century.
Sigmund Freud was the first to
suggest that emotional problems
"may be the symptoms of
something much deeper,"
"something more significant,"
"something the mind is
hiding from itself,"
such as a traumatic
childhood experience
or a forbidden sexual impulse.
So he had people
lie on his couch
and talk about their
dreams and their childhood
in the hope that they
might say something
that would reveal the true cause
of their emotional distress.
"This kind of therapy
was intense, complex,"
and went on for
a very long time.
"WOODY ALLEN: Uh,
yes, eight years,"
"I was on a couch, and, um,"
"five years, I was allowed to
sit up and face him and..."
"GILBERT: In a 1970s interview,"
comedian Woody Allen
poked fun at the process.
"I dont know. DICK CAVETT:
How do you know, really?"
Thats what is always
the big question mark
"for me, is when do you
decide, ""Im done""?"
"Ah, thats a good point."
I dont know if youre
ever really done.
I know that certain
characteristics about me
are different now than they
were when I started analysis.
"Im... I started when I
was, uh, 22, and Im 35."
"So, I have aged."
"Thats something. (Cavett,
audience laughing)"
"Uh... That is progress,
cause its upward."
"Yes. Yes. Um, yeah."
"Uh, and I can... when I have
sexual relations with someone,"
I can now think of that person.
"Rather than...? Rather
than somebody else,"
which is an enormous
step forward to me.
How many years did that take?
"Where did that
come in, roughly?"
That just came in last week. Oh.
"GILBERT: In recent years,
Freuds therapy has evolved"
"into a more streamlined
form of the treatment,"
known as psychodynamic therapy.
The television
series The Sopranos
introduced the therapy
to a new generation.
So youre carrying all this guilt
when your mother is clearly
someone who has great difficulty
in maintaining a
relationship with anyone.
But shes my mother.
RICHARD FRIEDMAN:
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
focuses on the role
of unconscious conflict
"in causing your problems
in relationships,"
"in your love life,
in your work life,"
"so that these are things that
are largely hidden from you,"
but they are making
you miserable.
And the role of
psychodynamic psychotherapy
"is to uncover them, to
make them conscious,"
to make you aware of that.
The focus is on helping the
patient develop insight
into how things they feel today
or expectations they have
"about life and about people
come from their past,"
and that the insight
itself helps them to...
to change their behavior
and their ways of thinking
and... and helps
with the symptoms
they might be experiencing.
GILBERT: Psychodynamic
therapy is based on the fact
that people dont always know
why they feel and think
and act as they do.
"But in recent years,"
some psychologists
have suggested
that rather than searching
"for the hidden causes
of emotional problems,"
therapists might
just help people
develop the skills they
need to deal with them.
"This idea is the basis of a
different kind of therapy,"
one thats helping
people learn to control
one of the most primitive
human emotions: fear.
Christina Kelley is a
freshman at Harvard.
"Shes a great student
and a terrific athlete,"
but shes deathly
afraid to do something
that millions of
Americans find easy.
KELLEY: I am afraid of flying.
Its not rational-- I know that--
"but at the same time,"
thats definitely just
what makes it a phobia.
"I just cant... I
know its irrational,"
and I cant do anything about it.
Its not that Im...
afraid that theyre going to
go crashing to the ground
"or that someones
going to, you know,"
"try to take it
over or anything,"
but... theres not
really anything
"that I can, like, pinpoint
as to why Im afraid,"
and so I think that kind of adds
"to the whole, like,
overarching fear."
GILBERT: Is fear of
flying really irrational?
Do we have nothing to
fear but fear itself?
I am... I am scared
to death of dogs.
"I mean, dogs are scary things."
"Theyre... theyre these sort of
strange, failed human beings"
"who have all these emotions,"
and yet they have these enormous
teeth at the same time.
I always have that
weird sensation
when Im out on a balcony
or in a high place
"that... where the
bottom is accessible,"
that Im going to climb
over the railing.
That doesnt mean youre going to
"or youre even
contemplating it,"
but the fact that
youre in a situation
"where its possible, it
completely unnerves me."
Does anyone else have that?
(laughs) Yeah.
I think our bodies are
beautifully equipped.
Our reptilian brains and
our animal tendencies
are generous and
smart and helpful.
"And you know, if
my house is shaking"
"in the middle of
an earthquake,"
"I-I hope my body will
kick into high adrenaline,"
grab my dogs and my turtle and
grab everything and leave.
(rumbling)
RANDOLPH NESSE: There
are certain situations
that have recurred
over evolutionary time over and
over again that cause fear.
"For instance, some nasty animal
running toward you very fast"
and baring its fangs.
"Thats the kind of situation
thats happened not too often,"
but often enough
so that individuals
who have what we call a
fight-flight response
have a lot of advantages
"over those who say,
""Oh, hello, kitty."""
"Uh, its just not a good
thing to be, you know,"
laid-back and mellow
when theres a lion coming
towards you very quickly.
"So, in the clinic, of course,
we call this a panic attack."
A panic attack is just identical
"to a fight-flight response,"
"and its perfectly
normal lots of the time,"
but not usually in
a grocery store.
GILBERT: Many of the fears
that weve inherited
from our ancestors
are perfectly rational.
It makes sense to be wary
"of small spaces
and thunderstorms,"
"and even snakes,"
like this fairly large python
thats crawling on me now.
But sometimes our
fear is irrational.
"Its more intense
than it ought to be,"
or its in reaction to things
that cant really hurt us.
"These fears are
called phobias,"
"and for some people,
theyre so debilitating"
that they need help
overcoming them.
"In some cases, anti-anxiety
medication can be helpful."
"If someone flies a
few times a year,"
and they... and they get anxious
"every time it
starts to lift off,"
"or-or typically
when it lands, um,"
theres nothing wrong with
taking a pill for that.
"If, on the other
hand, youre somebody"
"who has to fly
several times a week,"
"or, you know, a couple
of times a month,"
"and its part of your life,"
then that may not be
the best treatment.
Then what you want to do is to
actually change your behavior.
GILBERT: Medications havent
worked for Christina Kelley.
"With emotions, its often
a paradox, you know?"
"That the more we dont
want an emotional state,"
the more that we experience it.
"Right? And as soon as we
allow the emotion to come,"
"a lot of times,
it kind of starts to
diminish more quickly."
"GILBERT: Today,
Christina Kelley will
attempt to board a plane"
"with Todd Farchione,"
the therapist who is helping
her conquer the phobia
thats kept her from traveling
to visit friends and family.
Just the way it is.
"Whether you feel things,
or you dont feel things,"
"whether its bumpy,"
"or not bumpy, that you can
handle that situation."
Thats the most important thing.
"GILBERT: Dr. Farchione uses
cognitive behavioral therapy,"
"or CBT, which is
extremely effective"
for people with
specific phobias.
About 85% of those who try it
show significant improvement.
"FRIEDMAN: Cognitive
behavioral therapy has
got a different focus,"
which is on identifying
and correcting dysfunctional
thoughts and feelings
that make you miserable.
"So, a cognitive behavior
therapist is not so interested"
in why you have those
thoughts or feelings.
"Hes interested, or
shes interested,"
in basically getting
you to identify them
and challenge them.
We say you have a little machine
"down, buried in your
emotional brain."
"And its spitting
out, you know,"
all of these really
scary kinds of thoughts.
"But because youre the one
thinking those thoughts,"
you tend to believe it.
So we have a saying
in cognitive therapy--
"""Dont believe
everything you think."""
"GILBERT: Christinas therapy
started two days earlier,"
when she met Dr.
Farchione at his office.
Most people sign up for a
dozen or more treatments
"over a period of weeks,"
but Christina opted
for a marathon session
lasting three days.
"Well, let me just start"
"by asking you how you, uh,
how you did last night."
Good. Um...
I tried to explain
it all to my family.
Right.
"So I think that helps me
kind of, like, go over it."
"So at this point,"
how are you feeling
about taking that flight?
Im very nervous.
"And, uh, it-it-it switches
back and forth between,"
"like, I can do this, and
then, suddenly, Ill feel like"
"this is really overwhelming,
and, like, all at once,"
and I cant believe
Im doing this. Um...
"With panic,"
what often happens is that
it becomes this cycle.
"Um, that theres a recognition
of the physical symptoms,"
"and as a result of that,
theres then an increase"
"in the actual physical
response, right?"
"An increase in those
symptoms, right?"
"So as you are approaching
the plane, for instance,"
"if you start having
physical feelings,"
"and you say to yourself, like,
""Well, theyre not going"
"to go away,"" or ""This is
going to be really bad;"
"this is going to
be an awful trip,"""
"this type of thing,
um, its likely"
that that... physiological
changes are going
"to increase, right?"
"So one of the things that we
want to do is, we want to see"
"if we cant elicit some
of these symptoms,"
"um, in part so
that you can see"
that this is just your body
doing what your body should do.
"GILBERT: Early in the session,"
Dr. Farchione asked Christina
to do a series of exercises
that bring about some of
the physical sensations
"associated with fear,"
such as dizziness...
shortness of breath...
and a racing heart.
(exhales)
The idea is that once Christina
becomes more familiar
"with these sensations,"
she will become
less afraid of them.
And how similar is that
to what you experience
prior to flying?
"Uh, pretty similar."
"Like, a six or a seven."
"Okay, a six or a seven."
"Were going to go into
this, um... this flight"
"with no safeties,
no avoidance,"
"and essentially,"
confront what it is
that youre afraid of.
And if that means
experiencing those sensations
"in that situation, again,
thats not a problem."
"Then its a matter of
allowing them to come,"
and allowing them to
diminish of their own accord.
"You know, if somethings
terrorizing you,"
"terrorizing you
and bothering you,"
"like, lets not...
lets not run away."
"Lets go find it, you know?"
(crying)
(sniffles)
(sniffles) This is overwhelming.
"Um, if you had to rate it on
a zero-to-eight-point scale,"
where would you put your
anticipatory distress right now?
Eight.
Eight. Okay.
So its pretty...
its pretty high.
GILBERT: Dr. Farchione
encouraged Christina
"not to push the frightening
thoughts aside,"
"but instead, to let
them come to mind"
so that they can be
examined or reappraised.
"So, what can we come up with
as a good alternative here?"
"Its going to be hard,
but its going to be okay."
Okay.
So wait a minute.
Its going to be hard.
Im going to feel...?
Scared and panicky.
Yup? Good.
GILBERT: One of the key
principles behind CBT
is that we can
change our feelings
by changing the thoughts
that produce them.
BARLOW: Were not trying to
stamp out all bad thoughts.
"In fact, that might
be counterproductive."
"Were just trying to say, ""Lets
look at the alternative."
"""Lets put this
in perspective."
"Lets reappraise this."""
"And, oh, yeah, youll continue
to have scary thoughts."
But you know what?
You can live with them.
"And when they do that,"
it actually changes
brain function.
"There are changes in
the prefrontal cortex,"
"working down into
the emotional brain,"
just by this really working
hard on reappraising.
Allowing it to unfold
is actually going to be
"the fastest way for it to...
for it to diminish, all right?"
Yeah. But youre still...
"youre still scared, and
you still need to do this."
Okay. Okay.
"All right, Todd,"
your return boarding pass is
stapled right on the back.
GILBERT: Now comes
the decisive moment.
Christina will attempt
to board a plane.
Cognitive behavioral
therapy has a cognitive
"or thinking component,"
but it also has a
behavioral component.
We must go out and do
the things were afraid of
so that we can learn
from experience
not to be afraid of them.
BARLOW: The important
thing is that reappraisal--
it has to be paired with
what we call exposure.
Ticket. Ah.
BARLOW: Where people will
begin to put themselves
in the feared situation--
"under therapeutic guidance,"
and with the appropriate
coping mechanisms--
where their emotional brain
can really begin to learn
and become convinced
that these terrible things
will not happen.
Whats wrong with the way that
youre feeling right now?
It sucks.
What sucks about it?
Its not comfortable.
Whats the most
uncomfortable part of it?
Is it the heart?
The heart rate?
Its feeling like
Im going to cry.
"And have been, for the
last, like, three days."
Thats not fun.
"Okay, so its-its feeling..."
its feeling as
though you might cry.
And what... what is the
implications of that?
What if you did cry?
I dont want... Im
not going to cry.
What if you did?
"Well, that just
makes it worse."
It does? Yeah.
WOMAN (over P.A.): Take
a moment to review the
safety information card
in your seat back pocket.
Passengers seated in rows
nine and ten are also asked
to review exit row
seating requirements...
BARLOW: What were trying
to end up with is somebody
who can totally
accept the full range
of their emotional experience--
"be aware of what their
emotions are doing,"
"in the way theyre
making you feel,"
"the way theyre
making you think,"
making you behave,"
and accept that.
"And sort of be with it, and
distance yourself from it."
"And in so doing, put the
emotion in its place."
I sort of like this idea
of you moving around
"a little bit, so if you can..."
"Like, get up, or just...?"
"Um, yeah, maybe get up,
maybe see if theres anything"
"in the overheads, uh,
that you might need."
"Um, if you want, you can put
my coat up in the overhead,"
or something along those lines.
Its okay.
Do it quickly. What?
I dont want there to
be that hesitation.
I want... (snaps his fingers)
There it is.
Ta-da!
"No, no, no. Go ahead
and put my coat"
"in the overhead
for me, please."
FARCHIONE: The one
moment that really stuck
out for me was the moment
at which she was
willing to get up.
"She didnt want to do
it, but she did it."
"You know, I mean,
she really..."
"She knew it was the
right thing to do,"
and she committed to it.
Excellent.
That was the point
at which I felt
very good about her ability
to overcome this problem.
Youre getting there.
Slowly but surely.
I... I dont know.
"Im going to say, actually, um,"
"I dont think its as
slowly as you, uh,"
you might imagine.
Youre doing... youre
doing a fantastic job.
Absolutely fantastic.
Thank you very much. Excuse me.
I might see you again soon.
Thank you.
See you guys.
All right.
I like them.
"Its like the, uh..."
"Yeah, they were
nice, right? Right."
"Its, uh... I wish we had,
like, some triumphant music."
Now this is where we
pull out the iPod...
"Yeah. ""Chariots of Fire."""
"...and you put on, maybe,
like, the Rocky theme."
"Yeah, yeah. Or
something like that."
KELLEY: I flew.
"Its exciting, and not as bad as
I thought it was going to be."
"But I did it, and
thats the first time"
"Ive gone in a real plane
in two and a half years,"
"and just the fact that...
that I did is, is empowering."
"And Im glad that it was
successful, and I..."
"In the middle, I felt
better, so, it was good."
GILBERT: Fear is an emotion
shared by many other animals.
(sinister laughter)
But human fear is unique
in one important way:
Its not limited to clear
and present danger.
Sometimes our greatest fears
are about things to come.
"I mean, an air conditioner
can drop off a building."
"You know, this is...
this is not irrational."
When Im walking down the
street and I think about
"air conditioners dropping
off of, you know,"
"the edges of buildings
onto my head,"
"even if somebody
says, ""Well, its only"
"a one-in-a-million chance
its going to happen,"""
"I mean, theres eight million
people in this city."
"And so thats actually, like,
a lot of air conditioners."
"Sometimes when Im really happy
and things are going well,"
"that makes me anxious,
because I think,"
"""Oh, God, you know, life
is so tenuous and fragile."
"(snaps fingers) In an instant,
it could all change."""
I have friends that sit there
and the glass is half full.
"My glass, somebody said
to me the other day,"
"is not only half empty, whats
in it is filled with poison."
"So, I am always anxious."
If anxiety prevented me from
doing what I wanted to do
"I wouldnt be sitting here, no."
I think it spurns me on.
Anxiety isnt something
if youre born with it
"that you can hope
to eliminate,"
its something that
you learn to use.
And to the degree
that you can use it--
and its a useful
emotion in that way.
"Its like having your own
little pump of caffeine,"
"uh, running
through your veins,"
"and you, you turn
it on, you order up,"
"you know, a triple-anxiety
cappuccino."
GILBERT: Anxiety is an
inevitable part of modern life.
"We worry about our
jobs, we worry about"
our children and our health.
We worry about money.
Our ability to
think about things
"that havent happened,
but might, can make life"
a stressful experience.
Stanford University
neuroscientist Robert Sapolsky
is the author of a book called
Why Zebras Dont Get Ulcers.
Hes spent his career
trying to understand stress
and the toll it takes on
our bodies and brains.
"According to Sapolsky, the
problem is that our minds"
dont turn the stress response
off once a danger has passed.
"Well, the basic problem is
that were so damn smart."
"Um, I mean, you take
a zebra, you know?"
"Im sure there are some very
insightful zebra out there,"
"but theyre not
one of the more,"
"sort of, nuanced species."
"As far as I can tell,"
"a zebra is sitting
there eating grass,"
and what its thinking
about is eating grass
or maybe somebody it
would like to mate with.
"A lion shows up, all
hell breaks loose."
"The zebra survives,
and five seconds later,"
its back to eating that grass.
Theres no anxiety.
Theres no close calls.
"Theres no existential pangs
of ""What does it all mean?"""
And its not till
when you get to us
that we are smart enough
to imagine our own deaths
or be moved by Beethoven
or read about kids
in a refugee camp on the
other side of the planet
and have a stress response.
Were dealing with a
very different species.
And what that mostly
gets you is the ability
to turn on the stress
response chronically
for purely
psychological reasons.
We turn on the exact
same stress responses
as the zebra running
for its life.
And we turn it for
hours and days and weeks
"and career-long periods,"
and thats not what
it evolved for.
(projector humming)
GILBERT: Just as our brains
can imagine the future...
"...so, too, can they
remember the past."
"Memory is one of
natures greatest gifts,"
but it comes at a cost.
"Because we can
re-experience past events,"
we can be terrorized today
by things that
happened long ago.
"And thats what happens to
people who suffer from PTSD,"
or post-traumatic
stress disorder.
(flames crackling)
(propellers whirring)
KING: You cant afford
to have feelings
when youre in a war.
You kill or be killed.
Thats your main objective:
Live and come home.
"After you see a war zone, yes,
your minds going to change."
GILBERT: Warren King
was a 19-year-old
former high school
football player
when he joined the Marines
and went to Vietnam.
He would return a different man.
"KING: The first couple weeks
when I came back home,"
"it was kind of rough, because
thats when the dreams--"
"the nightmares, started--
you know what I mean?"
"But at first, I laughed
about it, you know?"
"You know, you
know, its dreams."
You know what I mean? But...
It started getting
more deeper into me.
"GILBERT: Although Warren was in
Vietnam for less than a year,"
he relived the war
every day for the next
three decades.
"KING: I knew
something was wrong,"
but I didnt pay no
attention to it.
(woman speaking Vietnamese)
GILBERT: So how did you
know that you had PTSD?
"KING: Well, at first I
didnt know I had PTSD."
Whatd you think it was?
"Um, at first, I thought I was"
going crazy.
"You know, like I
was losing my mind."
"You know? And
then, eventually,"
I started remembering
these dreams.
"And I started remembering
where they took place,"
the people within these dreams.
"And then, um, it
started getting worse."
"I started doing,
drinking more..."
"Doing drugs, dont
want to go to sleep."
You know?
"Eventually, I was
killing myself."
"GILBERT: For more
than 30 years,"
Warren couldnt keep a job
or even stand to be
around other people.
"Eventually, he stopped
leaving his house."
KING: I was possessed.
My life ended.
I didnt have nothing.
Sometimes I didnt want to live.
But I was too scared
to kill myself.
GILBERT: Doctors at the
Veterans Administration
gave Warren a range
of medications:
"sleeping pills,
antidepressants,"
anti-anxiety drugs...
but nothing helped.
"Every night, the war
in his head raged on."
"Although any kind of
trauma can lead to PTSD,"
combat soldiers run an
unusually high risk.
"Because traditional
treatments fall short,"
tens of thousands of
soldiers and their families
are struggling
with the disorder.
"Yeah, he did, he got
a rope on that one."
"You got a little piece of
that one, didnt you? Huh?"
"Come on, Sis. Just throw it."
GILBERT: Bob is devoted
to his wife and their
two young children.
But his mind keeps returning
to something that
happened in Iraq.
Uniform stuff.
"Flashlights are
still dirty, see?"
"My letters are all
here, from my wife."
And I got more stuff
down in the bottom.
"I kept my uniforms and boots,"
just for keepsakes.
Smell that smell?
I cant get it out.
Cant get it out.
"GILBERT: In 2003,
Bob crossed into Iraq"
as part of the first
invasion forces.
"Within days, he found
himself on the outskirts"
of An Nasiriya in one
of the bloodiest battles
of the conflict.
The horrors of war
"were all around him, but
one image in particular"
is burned into his memory:
the face of the Iraqi soldier
who died in Bobs arms.
"BOB: Our column
was moving and, um,"
there was a bus and it
was... it was on fire.
And there were people
screaming and yelling.
(indistinct chatter)
(sirens blare)
"As we went by, you know,
trying to assess quickly"
what was going on...
and there were two
guys laying there.
And one of them was
missing his leg.
And the guy next to him had
a big hole in his chest.
"So we knelt down and I just
looked in the guys face,"
"and I just looked
at him, you know."
And I took my helmet off
and I just looked at him.
"And, uh, he died
looking at me."
He literally breathed
out his last breath
and did his little rattle and
stuff looking in my face.
And I watched his eyes go gray.
"And, uh, right now as
I tell you about that,"
I can see his face as clearly
as if Im looking at...
the floor-- just that clearly.
Its not some hazy memory.
"Its very clear, very clear."
"The voices, the
words exchanged,"
"the, the feeling--"
and-and thats the
part I hate the most--
I can feel what I felt as
clearly as I felt it then.
"Nightly, he would wake
up from a nightmare."
"Or hed be talking in
his sleep, waking up."
"Uh, hed be walking through
the house, on patrol."
I didnt have that
problem before.
"I mean, anybody who sits
up in their sleep and talks"
"and stuff like that,
thats... it is what it is."
But not getting up
and going on patrol
"or getting up and, you know,"
reliving a trauma scene again
or getting up and
shouting orders.
"You know, ""Get me some
cover fire over here!"
"I got problems,""
this and that..."
(clears throat)
Thats not normal.
GILBERT: Medication
and psychotherapy
"havent helped Bob much,"
and the tragedy in his past
continues to wreak havoc
in every aspect of his life.
(backup signal beeps)
"Three weeks ago,
Bob lost his job"
as a news director of
a TV station in Reno.
BOB: Were moving.
Were leaving Reno.
Were going back to the Bay Area
to start over.
"Um, and do what? I dont know."
I do think that the
symptoms of PTSD
"that I deal with every day,"
"and the fact that I
dont get a lot of rest,"
because I cant sleep...
so... yeah.
It contributed to me
losing my job here
"and, probably, my career."
LORI: I worry about the
stress of everything.
I cant tell you how many times
"in the last couple months,"
"Ive just, like, rolled over
in the middle of the night,"
just to make sure he
was still breathing.
Cause Im just-- I just dont know
how much more he can handle.
"BOB: Ill tell you whats
embarrassing to me, is having"
to go back to my mother-in-laws
house and regroup.
Ive never had to fall
back like that before.
"It makes me feel
like, you know,"
Ive done all these things in
my life and I-I just cant...
How the hell did I
get in this position?
I feel like I failed
and I let my family down.
"GILBERT: So, what causes PTSD?"
Why do our brains
sometimes remember
the very things wed most
like them to forget?
Emotional events leave
long-lasting traces in memory.
Thats why we all know
just where we were
"at 8:30 a.m. on September
11, but not on September 10."
What gives these memories
such staying power?
"When people experience
intense emotions,"
their bodies release
stress hormones
"such as cortisol
and adrenaline,"
and some scientists now
believe that these hormones
help burn in memories
of the events
that caused the emotions
in the first place.
"For nearly a decade,"
"Larry Cahill, a neurobiologist"
"at the University of
California, Irvine,"
has been studying the connection
between stress
hormones and memory.
"MAN: The experiment were
going to be running today,"
were going to be looking
at the physiological
components of your emotions...
"GILBERT: To investigate
the connection,"
Cahill and his colleagues
designed an experiment
in which two groups
of students reported
to their laboratory and watched
a slideshow of
disturbing images.
"After the slideshow, the
students in one group"
were asked to hold their hands
in a bucket of ice water
for as long as they
could-- an experience
that caused their bodies to
release stress hormones.
The students in a second group
were asked to hold their hands
in a bucket of lukewarm water--
with no release of
stress hormones.
MAN: Thanks for coming again.
"And, uh, I should explain"
that we did mislead you
a little bit last week.
"So, last week, we said..."
"GILBERT: A week later,
the students returned
to the laboratory"
and were surprised
with a memory test.
What were actually
going to do this week
is Im going to ask you to try
and remember some
of the images...
GILBERT: The results were not
what most scientists expected.
CAHILL: Some of my
colleagues-- because they come
"from a slightly different
perspective-- they thought,"
"well, you know, if you
learn something new"
and then do something
as... as distracting
"as dropping your
arm in ice water,"
that should be really
bad for memory.
It should be really bad
for the memory of
what you just learned.
You should forget it.
Memory should be worse.
"And I can understand that,
but thats not what we found."
GILBERT: The results of
Cahills experiment showed
that the students who had
put their arms in ice water
immediately after
viewing the slideshow
had much better
recall of the images.
The stress hormones coursing
through their veins
somehow burned the
experience they were having
into their memories.
CAHILL: A good memory
is exactly that--
a balance between keeping
what you ought to keep
and getting rid
of or abstracting
what you can get
rid of or abstract.
What we think we have here
with this whole business
of stress hormones
is a beautiful system
built in for doing just that.
GILBERT: Does the
kind of research
that you and others have done
give us any insights into
disorders like PTSD?
When someone experiences
something too traumatic--
"uh, a rape, a
horrible car crash,"
"uh, being in a battle--"
it could be that this
normally very helpful
memory boost system that
weve been talking about
somehow-- and for reasons
we dont fully understand--
"gets stuck in the
""on"" position, right,"
"and in the period during
and after the trauma,"
"repeatedly
strengthens a memory,"
"strengthens a memory,
strengthens a memory."
"The retrieval of the memory
causes the stress hormones,"
"and the stress hormones keep
strengthening the memory,"
and you can imagine a
positive feedback cycle.
(siren wailing)
"GILBERT: For Bob,
moving to California"
to live with his mother-in-law
has left him demoralized.
You guys going to
go outside and play?
GILBERT: Lori and the
kids are trying to adjust
"to a new routine
and a new school,"
but Bobs PTSD holds each
of them in its orbit.
WOMAN: Welcome to California.
Welcome back. LORI: Thank you.
Welcome back.
Here we go.
"Okay, so were going to..."
"today, were going to
talk about Gabriel"
"and how hes doing
in first grade,"
"and... hes only been here
for a little bit of time,"
"but hes transitioned well,"
so...
Hes showing
"some good leadership skills,
uh, with his peers--"
with both the boys and
the girls-- and he seems
"to be happy, uh, and
if he needs help,"
he has no problem asking
me. (toys clattering)
"Hey, try to do it
quietly, please."
"LORI: Sarah, dont
throw those, please."
"TEACHER: Sarah, can you
make a happy face with that?"
Can you be... With the yellow?
How about being quiet?
That would be something new.
"TEACHER: Well, theres
just so much to do."
(loud clattering) Okay.
No more... no more
dumping it in.
Just... okay.
LORI: There you go.
"Perfect, Gabriel. Sarah."
TEACHER: Okay. Well
clean those up later.
Okay? Sorry about that.
Its okay.
I have 20 of them in here.
BOB: I cannot stand loud.
I cant.
Noise sends my temper
and my blood pressure up.
"Hes doing really well,
and his writing--"
Ill show you a little
bit of his writing.
LORI: The hardest part
about post-traumatic stress
for a married woman...
(sniffles) is the
focus is on him.
A part of me feels like...
(sighs)
its not okay for me...
"...to break down,"
because the focus
is on helping him...
...and lifting him up
and getting him
through this time.
Hes so fragile right now.
This time has to be about
getting him through
and getting him to a
place where he feels
like hes on solid ground again.
(sniffles)
Then Ill have my time.
"I love you, baby.
Love you, too."
GILBERT: PTSD threatens
to destroy everything
Bob cares about.
"As he looks for a new
job in California,"
the obstacles seem
almost insurmountable.
BOB: I was mobilized twice
and I did the invasion.
"And, uh, we just moved
back to California."
We were gone out of
state for 20 months
and weve been back
about a month. Okay.
Age limit? 37.
No matter what? No matter what.
Im too old.
"Only looking for
officers, huh?"
Yeah and entry-level. Yeah?
"Some retail management,"
a lot of management in
the news business...
The market is running
tough right now. Yeah.
I appreciate it.
Thanks for your time.
"MAN: Thank you, sir."
"GILBERT: Before he left Reno,"
Bob learned about a new form of
cognitive behavioral therapy
to treat PTSD.
"But the treatment,"
"a variation of the one
used to treat phobias,"
would require Bob to confront
the memories that haunt him.
BOB: The counselor up in Reno
made me promise him
I would look into this
program that they have.
"Um, but you know what?
Im just not there yet."
Im not scared of it.
I just dont want to.
Its not... Im not afraid of it.
I just... I relive a lot of
them all the time anyway.
"Why do I want to go relive
them again, you know?"
"I just aint, I just
aint there yet."
"It might be a good program,
but I just... Im..."
"Look, Im all for doing
something that might help me,"
but I just aint...
Im just not there yet.
"I dont know whats
going to get me there,"
but Im not there yet.
GILBERT: The treatment that Bob
just cant bring himself to try
is the treatment that
saved Warren Kings life.
"By 2008, Warren had given up"
on the treatments
he was getting.
Then he came across
an ad in a newspaper.
"KING: Im reading the
paper, and I see this..."
"""University of
Pennsylvania, PTSD."
"Come to 3535 Market Street."""
"So I said to myself, ""Aw,
here come another fluke."
"Here come another VA."""
"You know, I mean, ""Theyre
going to give me medications."""
But they didnt.
"GILBERT: At the University
of Pennsylvania,"
researchers were
developing a form of CBT
"called ""prolonged
exposure therapy."""
"Instead of hiding from
his traumatic memories,"
this therapy would require
Warren to embrace them...
to relive them
over and over again
until his fear of
them diminished.
Reliving horror isnt easy.
"Five weeks into his treatment,"
Warren was still trying
to avoid the pain.
(exhales heavily)
GILBERT: Warren needed
to face his memories
both in and out of his
therapists office.
The movie Full Metal Jacket
had always sent
Warren into a panic.
"Now, he forced himself to watch
the movie again and again."
"Eventually, it
began to get easier."
ROTHBAUM: We think that whats
happening in exposure therapy
is new learning.
"A lot of times, people
years ago used to think"
"that in our work with anxiety,"
that we were erasing
a fear memory.
And we know that thats not true.
Were not erasing the memory;
were teaching the
person new things.
"Were teaching
them, for example,"
"""I dont need to be
scared of this memory."
"""Yes, this was a terrible
thing that happened,"
"""but I dont need
to be scared of it."
"""I can go there, I
can think about it,"
"I can talk about
it, and Im okay."""
And thats new learning.
"What, seven years?
Yeah, well..."
"GILBERT:
After 18 sessions, Warrens
progress is unmistakable."
CAPALDI: What I wanted to ask
you to do today was to...
"go through the story, again."
"Um, to do the
imaginal exposure."
"Um, and you remember
how we do that."
We have you talk
about what happened
from your memory.
"You know, close your eyes and
really try to visualize it,"
"and put yourself back there,
really try to revisit it."
"Close your eyes,"
"visualize the memory,"
and start talking about it.
"We came in, we started
taking machine-gun fire."
"Everybody know that sound.
When you hear that sound,"
you have to get
down low as you can.
Youre afraid.
"And more and more youre going,"
you see people lying
there with their guts out.
"And nothing you
could do for em,"
then theyre calling you by name.
"Thats the worst part,
but theres nothing you
could do about it."
Youre no doctor.
You just got to keep moving on.
"You just gotta go
there and do your job,"
you know what I mean?
"And, and its-its
no time for guilt."
"Because you was always told,"
"""Kill or be killed."""
Thats the name of the game.
(sighs)
Im okay.
"No sweating of the
hands, no headache."
"A little teary, but..."
"far as that, Im all right."
Okay.
GILBERT: Let me ask
you this: If I had PTSD
"and I was haunted by dreams
and haunted by thoughts,"
Id want to get away from them.
And the last thing I would do
"would go see a
therapist who says, ""Oh,
no, youre going to--"
"were going to
talk about them."""
"Id say, ""No. I see
enough of that at night."
"I dont want to see
that during the day."""
Can you relate to
people feeling that way?
"KING: Well, I used
to be like that."
I didnt want to talk about it.
I didnt want to say
nothing about it.
But you got to face it.
Do you think there
are a lot of soldiers
"who might not
even ask for help,"
cause they have
kind of this sense
"that ""Im supposed
to be brave,"
"""Im supposed to make
my way through this,"
"Im not supposed to ask
other people to help me""?"
"Yes, well, theyre fools."
They are fools.
Cause sometime you need
to drop that macho thing
"and ask for help, because
if you dont ask for help,"
you gonna die.
"And thats what you
want to be, macho man?"
"Well, you know something, the
graves are full of macho men."
"ROTHBAUM: Ive been doing this
work for over 20 years now,"
and at times the
emotion in the room...
is just palpable. Its raw.
I have felt like I was holding
someones broken
heart in my hands.
Its been so raw.
But part of what Ive
taken away from this work
is the resilience
of the human spirit.
"It is just amazing
what we can go through,"
"and how we can
come through it,"
"at the other
side, and be okay."
GILBERT: Would you
say youre better now?
"Not just a little
better, but all better?"
"KING: Well, Im not going
to say Im all better."
But I know how to handle PTSD.
You never get rid of PTSD.
Theres no cure for it.
GILBERT: Doesnt sound like your
treatment helped your life.
It sounds like it gave
you your life back.
"The day I went
to that program,"
"till today,"
is the best years of
my life I ever had.
I have a life.
You know what I mean?
"Like I said, Im not
letting it beat me."
You know what I mean?
I am doing well
than Ive ever been
in my whole 30-something
years when I had PTSD.
You know what I mean?
What more can I say?
Im a happy camper.
(laughs)
"GILBERT: Every human life
has its share of sorrow,"
and theres just no
getting around it.
Sadness rolls in like a fog.
We cry. We mourn.
And eventually the fog lifts
and we get on with our lives.
"But for some people,"
"sadness gets a grip
and just wont let go,"
and thats when a
normal human emotion
becomes a psychological
disorder.
(seagulls squawking)
Depression is these feelings
of sadness and anxiety
that hit a bottom and continue
inappropriately long.
Its almost about duration.
"Sadness is manageable.
Um, depression is not."
"And I-I think thats, um--"
"thats the major
difference between them,"
its a question of scale.
And I think its tricky
in our own lives
"to sometimes make
that distinction, um,"
as to whether we are feeling
simple human sadness
or whether weve-weve
fallen into something else.
"One of the great, um,
things Ive learned--"
the opposite of depression
is not happiness.
"Um, the opposite of
depression is vitality."
Its not just a
sense of melancholy.
"Its not just, um, a--"
a pervasive sadness.
"Theres, uh... there are
more hideous aspects"
"in the sense that it
affects your concentration,"
it affects your
cognitive abilities.
"...talk to her, um,"
"said that shes
really, really sweet."
"CAITLIN DAVIES:
Hi, Im Caitlin."
And Im 18.
"State your last name, too. Oh."
Caitlin Davies. Go.
"Okay, Im Meghan Davies.
Im Caitlins twin."
Younger twin by 46 minutes.
"Yep. Im 18 years old, also."
Tomorrow we graduate
high school. Mm-hmm.
"GILBERT: Two years ago,"
Caitlin Davies was diagnosed
with clinical depression.
"Her identical twin, Meghan,"
showed no symptoms
of the illness.
We asked the twins to
record video diaries
during the summer after they
graduated from high school.
(overlapping chatter)
"CAITLIN: Um, is there
anything you feel..."
youre feeling optimistic about?
The future.
Im excited to go off to college.
Thats good.
Youre taking a math class?
Um...
MEGHAN: Caitlin-- optimistic?
"CAITLIN: Well, Im feeling
optimistic about next year,"
"and the possibilities
of the summer,"
"and, um, things like that."
"But, again, thats"
also for me a
double-edged sword.
Its also what Im feeling...
Pessimistic.
...pessimistic about.
"Im worried about next
year, going off to school."
How am I going to be
able to handle that?
"GILBERT: Despite
her depression,"
"Caitlin maintained a straight
""A"" average in high school"
and remains determined
to go to college.
"But as she prepares
to graduate,"
she finds herself spiraling
downward once again.
CAITLIN: Depression-- its
not like having a bad day.
Its just so much more
"to that: the exhaustion,"
"and the lack of focus,
lack of motivation."
"Its just everything, because
sadness is something"
that you can... its the
easiest of all of those things
"to deal with, because there
is an outlet for that."
"Like, how do you have an
outlet for lack of motivation?"
How do you have an
outlet for lack of focus?
"Like, lack of energy?"
"Like, what can
you do about that?"
"At least with sadness,
like, you can,"
"I dont know, you can write,"
"I mean, you can cry."
But you cant do anything
about all those.
"And its just, its just so much
more than just emotional."
Its so much more physical
than what a lot of
people think it is.
Because your body feels it.
You feel down. You cant move.
You cant get up and do
what you want to do.
"And it doesnt matter how much
you want to do something,"
you just cant.
"GILBERT: At 18, Caitlin
is waging a fight"
that could determine
the course of her life.
She must devote all her
energy to getting well enough
to leave home at the
end of the summer.
(Caitlin sighs)
"BOB ANTONIONI: In closing,
let me just say this."
This has been the
opportunity of a lifetime
to serve in this branch.
It doesnt get any
better than this.
"You know, time comes on,"
"and, um, Ive decided that it
was time for me to leave."
"Um, I never imagined that I
would get elected, and, um,"
"you know, its been the best."
Thanks very much.
(applause)
GILBERT: Senator Robert
Antonioni has served
in the Massachusetts state
legislature for 20 years.
"For most of that time,
he was a very public man"
with a very private secret.
ANTONIONI: I think
that my struggles
"with depression began in 1999,"
when my brother
committed suicide.
I had all sorts of feelings
"of guilt,
responsibility, neglect,"
"um, that, that I
carried with me."
"I felt very, uh, traumatized
with my brothers death."
And the way that I dealt
with it most often was
"to remove myself from, um,
the normal daily events."
"And for a politician,
thats not a good thing."
"Um, because politicians
dont get elected"
by removing themselves
from the public.
They get elected by
being in the public.
I would frequently go home.
I would just curl up
and burrow myself in.
"Um, and Id sleep, you
know, excessively."
"I frequently would think,"
"""I just gotta get
ahold of myself"
"and stop feeling
this way."" You know?"
"""Real men dont cry."
"""And if youre a real
man, youll get over it."
"Cut it out. Get it together."""
I can remember one
day in my office
"just sitting down, crying."
"And my chief of staff said,"
"""Bob, we gotta do something
about this, you know?"""
That gave me the inclination
that something had
to be done here.
"You know, had to, had
to deal with this."
Yeah.
GILBERT: Bob sought the
help of a psychotherapist.
"As he began to talk about
the loss of his brother,"
he discovered something
important about himself.
"ANTONIONI: When I began
therapy, I found it very hard"
"to talk about what
I was feeling,"
because I was not
accustomed to doing that.
I had never opened up
the way that I did
with the therapist.
"Eventually, I came to
understand that the hurt"
and the feelings that I
had on a regular basis
"werent just related to my
brothers death, but that"
I had an issue with depression.
And its been there for... it
had been there for a long time.
CHIDEYA: Its not bad to be sad
"or bad to be angry,"
"but when you are persistently
sad over a long period of time,"
"and its not about the moment,"
its about something
that happened...
"you know, thats a time
when you have to say,"
"""Well, whats going
on with my mind and my
body and my spirit?"""
"I remember thinking, ""Im
having a bad week."""
You know? And then the bad
week turned into a bad month.
And then that turned
into a bad year.
And then it turned
into a bad four years.
"And then I remember being
absolutely terrified,"
"because I thought,
""Have I turned a corner"
"that I will never,
ever be able to fix?"""
The most fascinating
thing about depression
is that you cant pin it down.
You cant say its just sadness.
Youre saddened by the fact that
youre not in control
of your thoughts.
"Theres no desire to get
out of bed and do things,"
because youre not
sure you can do them
with any great sense of judgment
or without any sense that
itll make you feel better.
GILBERT: Depression doesnt
just change the way we feel.
It actually changes the
way we see the world.
"Dr. Ian Gotlib,
professor of psychology"
"at Stanford University,
is trying to understand"
just how deep these changes go.
"In one of his experiments,"
a group of women with
a history of depression
and a group of healthy
control subjects
watched faces on
a computer screen.
The faces started out
with a neutral expression
that slowly transformed
into either a happy
or a sad expression.
The women were told
to press a button
as soon as they noticed
the transformation.
Gotlib found that
nondepressed women
were much faster to notice
the expression becoming happy
"than the women who were,
or had been, depressed."
GOTLIB: Weve been finding
that depressed people tend
to guide their attention
to negative things.
"When there are both negative
and positive things happening,"
theyll tend to really
focus on the negative.
"They attend to more
sadness, and importantly,"
they remember more sadness.
So those memories of sadness
stay with them longer.
"Depressed people
remember the criticism,"
they dont remember the praise.
"Or they discount the praise,"
"and they say, ""It
just wasnt warranted."
"I didnt deserve it."""
"Um, and even things
that are neutral,"
they tend to interpret
as more negative.
GILBERT: Gotlibs studies suggest
that this isnt something
that depressed people
are conscious of doing.
"Rather, they just seem to
be especially sensitive"
to negative information--
one of the things that
distinguishes depression
from normal sadness.
GOTLIB: These thoughts
are so automatic
theyre part of us.
"We go, uh, through the day."
"We have all sorts of
thoughts, reactions."
And Im sure youve been in a car
and 15 minutes later youre
at a different intersection
with no real memory
of how you got
from the last one to this one.
But you did it and
you did it safely.
"But you did it
outside of awareness,"
and you did it automatically.
"And for depressed people, thats
what these thoughts are like."
"Theyre, theyre just automatic,"
"um, knee-jerk reactions."
"So, well start with the
first saliva sample."
If you could take
the top off of that
and put the cotton
swab in your mouth.
And Ill time you
for three minutes.
GILBERT: But why are
some depressed people
prone to negative thinking?
"In another experiment,
Gotlib set out to explore"
the biological underpinnings
of this thinking style.
So now were going to
do a math activity.
"And for this task, well
ask you to start off"
at the number 400 and
count backwards by sevens.
GILBERT: He subjected a
number of volunteers--
"some at risk for
depression, some not--"
to a difficult mental task
and measured the level
of the stress hormone cortisol
that was in their saliva.
Start. 400...
393...
383...
300... Thats incorrect.
Please start over. 400...
393...
370...
Thats incorrect.
Please start over.
400...
GILBERT: The results were clear.
"Under stress,"
people who were
vulnerable to depression
generally produced
higher levels of cortisol
than people who werent.
"GOTLIB: In doing this,"
"one of the things
we found is that,"
"um, people who are depressed
and people who are prone"
to becoming depressed
are actually
more biologically
reactive to stressors.
"When theyre confronted
with a stressor,"
they have no control over it.
"They secrete more cortisol,
the stress hormone."
They dont mean to
be more reactive.
Thats a genetic factor over
which they have no control.
And that goes along with this
attention to negative events.
Theres a whole picture
of just a greater reactivity
to negative information.
"You cant learn, for
example, easily,"
"to control your cortisol,"
"uh, to control this
stress hormone."
But you can learn
to respond differently
to stressors.
"You can learn to
recognize stressors,"
to not have a gut
reaction to them
"as, ""Oh, my God,
this is horrible."""
"But to say, ""Aha, now I
need to do something."""
And thats a very
different response.
And it elicits a very different
stress hormone response.
GILBERT: Psychotherapy
helped Bob Antonioni
realize the role stress
played in his depression.
But he was unprepared
for his therapists
recommendation
that he combine therapy
with medication.
ANTONIONI: It took
me several years
to feel comfortable
taking medication.
I was afraid political
opponents or the media
"would somehow uncover that
I was taking medication,"
"receiving therapy,
for depression."
I would go to a
drugstore that was
half an hour from my house.
I saw a therapist 45 miles away.
"GILBERT: As a senator, Bob
began advocating for funds"
to combat mental illness
and prevent suicide.
But he hid his own depression
from all but a
few close friends.
"Then one day in 2003, he
decided hed had enough."
ANTONIONI: I was asked
by a local reporter
why was I advocating so
much for these things?
And I disclosed
"my brothers passing,"
"and how he died, by suicide."
"And the reporter asked,"
"""Bob, did you ever
suffer from depression?"""
"I said that, ""Yes,
I have depression."""
"And she said, ""Are you sure
you want to say that?"""
"And I said, ""Yeah. I gotta,
cause its the truth."""
"The day after the
story appeared,"
I went to a big
function in Boston.
All the political
people were there.
"And I remember walking into
that auditorium thinking,"
"""What an idiot!"
"""Why did I say all that?"
"These people are going to
think Im nuts!"" you know?"
"Well, let me tell you, as soon
as I saw someone who knew me,"
"they came up, hugged me,
""Bob, Im so proud of you."
"Im so glad you
talked about this."""
"Um, thank God, you know."
"More people, they just
kept running up to me."
"You know, youd
think Id just won"
the Stanley Cup or something.
"And, you know, I was really
taken aback, I was shocked."
"And, uh, I said,
""Wow, okay."""
"You know, ""Thank
you. Thank you."""
"I didnt know what the reaction
would be from the public,"
"but people were like,
""Wow. Thank you."""
"You know, ""Im so happy that
youre talking about this."""
"And um, it was, uh..."
"The reaction was just
unbelievable, it really was."
It was pretty cool.
Yeah.
GILBERT: Youve been
to the bottom of this.
You look like youre
at the top. (laughs)
"I mean, you seem...
you look like a guy,"
"you strike me as a person
who, at least at the moment,"
"is feeling pretty happy, pretty
optimistic about the future,"
pretty confident in the
decisions you made.
"I do, Im really
happy about it."
Im very fortunate.
Im in a place where I am now
because of the medication
and because of the therapy.
But life-changing decisions
"can make things
easier, too. Thats..."
Deciding... deciding not
to run for re-election
and to have one focus--
"um, in this case,
practicing law--"
has made life so much more
manageable and enjoyable.
Im not constantly anticipating
"the next shoe to
fall, you know?"
"Um, or the next
problem to arise."
"Now, Im, I feel like Im
more in control of things"
"and, uh, managing
things easier."
There are many moments in my
life now when I am happy.
Bicycling promotes
happiness for me.
Doing fun things
promotes happiness.
I dont consider myself
cured from depression.
Its something I have to
continue to deal with.
"But like high blood
pressure or cholesterol,"
theres medication I can take
and things that I can do
so that happiness
becomes more possible.
"CHASE: I went through,
like, six or seven years"
of real depression.
"I just couldnt quite figure
out what it was, how..."
And I just was never quite
given the right pill.
"You know? ""Oh, put him on
Prozac, put him on..."""
"Thats, you know..."
"Its still trial and error
with most people, I think,"
who suffer from depression.
But with the help of
the right therapist
"and with the
help of finally the right
prescription medication,"
somehow I knew Id
come out of it.
Im someone who has
been on antidepressants
for 15 years.
"And I always question, is it--
not just is it good or bad--"
but am I making the right
choices for my mind and my body?
"I felt very conflicted
about medication, um..."
because I felt that it was
some sort of a concession.
That I was a failure.
"However, it helped me a lot."
"I had felt there was this
sort of endless, infinite"
pit of despair that I had
fallen into that had no bottom
and that was very likely
going to end in suicide.
And the medication
brought that up to a point
where I knew I
could land on that
and I wasnt going
to go any deeper.
GILBERT: Its clear
that depression can
have a profound effect
on the way we think and feel.
But theres growing evidence
that it might do
more than that--
that it may affect the physical
structures of our brains.
"Yvette Sheline,
professor of psychiatry"
"at Washington University,"
has been studying
this possibility
for over 15 years.
"In 1993, she began a
series of experiments"
to see if she could find an
abnormality in the brains
of people with depression.
"Including loss of
interest in things,"
you just didnt care about things
that used to give you pleasure?
"SHELINE: At the time that
I started to do this work,"
the idea that there was a
connection between depression
"and the brain was, was
kind of, um, anathema."
"I mean, people really
didnt believe that."
It took me four different
times to get my grant funded
because people really
didnt buy that idea.
"SUBJECT: No, I can
usually always asleep."
Mm-hmm...
"GILBERT: In her studies,"
Sheline compared
a group of women
who suffered from depression
with a group of women who didnt.
SHELINE: So what I wanted to do
was to go back and talk about
some of the different episodes
of depression youve had
throughout your life.
"GILBERT: After a detailed
psychological examination,"
Sheline used MRI to measure the
activity in each womans brain.
She was especially interested
in the part of the brain
known as the hippocampus.
SHELINE: This is the very
outer edge of the hippocampus.
"And, as we get really close to
the center of the hippocampus,"
this is the sort of
typical seahorse shape
that people talk about.
"GILBERT: From previous
studies, Sheline knew
that depressed people"
"experience elevated
levels of stress hormones,"
"and that over time,
these hormones"
can damage the hippocampus.
"SHELINE: The hippocampus
is a very delicate
part of the brain,"
so it gets damaged easily.
"Its kind of like the
canary in the coal mine,"
a signaler of
something being wrong.
"GILBERT: After the brain
scans were completed,"
Sheline began the
painstaking task
of measuring the size of
each womans hippocampus.
SHELINE: I was doing all this
"data analysis myself, because
I didnt have a statistician"
"or, you know, anything
at that point in time."
"Um, and we... and we
finally had all the data,"
and we got the results.
I was just really excited.
GILBERT: A pattern emerged from
the rows and rows of numbers.
The hippocampus of the
average depressed woman
was smaller than the hippocampus
of her non-depressed
counterpart.
A second study revealed
even more disturbing news--
"the longer a woman
had been depressed,"
the smaller her
hippocampus tended to be.
SHELINE: Its evidence that this
is a brain disease.
Its not just a
lack of willpower.
Its not that people
are just being lazy.
"It really is an illness,
like any other illness."
GILBERT: Shelines findings
remind us that mental illnesses
are nothing more or less
than physical illnesses
that happen to impair
psychological functioning.
"SHELINE: To have a physical
basis for depression,"
"I think, really is helpful."
"You can say, ""Look,
this illness not only
makes you feel lousy"
"""and have trouble with all
these aspects of your life,"
"""but theres a physical
basis in... in the brain,"
"""and we can... we can
show you right here,"
"this part of the
brain is affected."""
"GILBERT: Remarkably,
Sheline also found"
that people who took
antidepressants
"did not show
hippocampal shrinkage,"
suggesting that the medication
may actually keep the brain
from being damaged
by depression.
SHELINE: So the good
news from examining
treated versus
untreated depression
"is that if you have been
treated for depression,"
you dont get the volume
reduction in hippocampus.
It means its absolutely critical
"to have early intervention,
early treatment for depression."
That the sooner you can catch it
the more likely
you are to not have
any hippocampal volume loss.
GILBERT: Although
antidepressant medications
"clearly can help
people with depression,"
no one really understands why.
Many scientists have assumed
that antidepressants work
by changing the
chemistry of the brain--
by increasing or
decreasing the level
of important chemicals
known as neurotransmitters.
But recent discoveries suggest
that antidepressants may
actually do much more than that.
RONALD DUMAN: ...neurons
of the hippocampus. These
newborn neurons triple...
"GILBERT: Ronald Duman,"
"professor of psychiatry
at Yale University,"
suspected that antidepressants
might alter the brain itself.
He and his team gave
antidepressants to rats
and then analyzed
their brain tissue.
After months of carefully
counting the number of cells
"in each rats hippocampus,"
their analysis
revealed something
that no one had ever expected.
The antidepressant
medication didnt just change
"the brains chemistry,"
it actually caused the
brain to grow new cells.
DUMAN: So this is an example
of how were able to see
new neurons in the brain.
"And this is a cross
section of a rodent brain,"
through the hippocampus--
the part of the hippocampus
where new cells are born.
"And you can see with the
antidepressant treatment,"
you get an increase
in the number of these
new darker cells.
This looks really quite amazing.
"Three weeks of treatment
with an antidepressant,"
and Im seeing substantially
more cell growth
in the hippocampus of the rat
thats gotten the
drug than hasnt.
Whatd you do the first
time you saw this picture?
We were just jumping up and...
"jumping off the, uh...
lab bench here, and..."
Growing new neurons
of your own. Yeah.
"GILBERT: Dumans
findings stunned the
scientific community,"
because they suggested
that antidepressant drugs
might be helping the brain
repair the cellular damage
associated with depression.
DUMAN: It was really
"just incredibly, uh,
novel and remarkable."
"I mean, its something that
has really changed the way"
the field thinks
about depression
and how antidepressants work.
"There are actually,
uh, new cells"
that are being born with chronic
antidepressant treatment.
GILBERT: Dumans research is
helping scientists understand
how antidepressants might
help reverse the effects
of clinical depression.
But antidepressants
dont work for everyone.
"Depression, like most
mental illnesses,"
is a combination of
experience and biology.
"Experiences such as divorce,
death of a loved one,"
"even the birth of a child
can trigger depression,"
but they only seem
to do so among those
who are already
vulnerable to the disease.
"Thats why two people can
have identical experiences,"
"or identical genes, and
yet only one of them"
will become depressed.
"MEGHAN: Were taking
pictures, Mom?"
TRICIA DAVIES: Yes.
(phone ringing)
(indistinct conversations)
I have so many things.
(laughing)
"""Im so talented!"""
"I dont know, Meghan."
That sort of looks
good. Sort of looks...?
GILBERT: Its graduation day--
just ten weeks before Caitlin
is supposed to go to college.
"Although she rallies
when she has to,"
her family is
increasingly worried
that the antidepressants
are not helping.
Okay. Theyll tell us how
to wear it when we go...
All right. All right.
Aah... Yay.
Youre almost there.
"All right, give
us a ""cheese."""
Cheese.
"GILBERT: When Bob and
Tricia married, they knew
they wanted a family."
"Their son Evan was born first,"
and two years later
they had twins.
There we go. Is that the side
youre supposed to have it on?
We dont know. This is how...
Its me.
"TRICIA: Meghan and
Caitlin may have come out
of the womb together,"
but theyve been
different ever since.
"From the beginning they
were always holding hands,"
constantly playing
with each other.
They always had a special
bond from the beginning.
(both singing)
TRICIA: Caitlin always seemed
to be a little dominant
"in terms of kind of
arranging their social life,"
"and doing things, and,
um, being in charge."
Hell come down...
"Starting at the end
of eighth grade, um..."
I started to notice
that they kind of did
almost a complete reversal.
Meghan was always
filling the silence
"and becoming the social,
outgoing, talkative one."
"And I noticed that
Caitlin-- I dont know,"
she just didnt seem to
be always chattering
"and always happy,
like she used to."
"I used to call her
my little sunshine,"
and it occurred to me
"that, um, there were
not a whole lot of
sunny days anymore."
So I really started to worry
that her life was not the way
she really wanted it to be.
"At this point, I was thinking
that Caitlin needed help."
I finally went online
"and the Depression Centers
questionnaire came up,"
"and that was very
scary because when I was
able to answer ""yes"""
"to pretty much every question,"
"it occurred to me that, um...
that she must be depressed."
"Hey, theres Sheila."
"Hey, Sheila."
"Hey, guys. How are you?"
"Good. Howdy, stranger.
How are you? Good."
First time youve seen
Caitlin in a long time.
"SHEILA MARCUS: When Caitlin
initially came in, I felt"
quite confident that we would
be able to turn her around
very quickly with our
traditional first approaches.
"So, typically we would begin
with one class of medicines."
"And that, I felt, would
certainly turn her around"
"within the first three months,"
and thats fully what I expected.
"However, for Caitlin, that
turned out not to be the case."
"So, we found ourselves going
through one, and then two,"
"and then three, and then four,"
and then five different classes
of medication treatments.
"GILBERT: As summer
begins, Caitlin is
running out of options."
"Shes tried different kinds of
medications and therapies,"
but she isnt getting better.
CAITLIN; I would love
to not be having the
worst summer of my life.
I cant get out of bed.
"If I can get out of bed, maybe
I can make it downstairs."
But its not like I want to
watch TV all day or sit inside.
"Its, like, you
want to go outside,"
"you want to be
with your friends,"
"you want to be running
around, and you cant."
"Doesnt matter how much
you want to, you cant,"
and it just sucks.
It just really does.
"MEGHAN: Okay, so its
Thursday, and this is Meghan."
Caitlin doesnt mind that Im
off doing things on my own.
"She actually, like, encourages
it, she thinks its fine."
"(voice breaking):
But, I mean..."
"its just-just really
hard, because..."
I always have that
sense of guilt.
But if Im going out
there and Im having fun
"and Im enjoying life,"
but shes not being able to
do the same things that I am
and not finding joy in life
"and not having fun in
everyday situations,"
how can I not feel
guilty about that?
"I think she knows that the
rest of us are struggling,"
but I just dont think
she knows how much
and how deeply this is
affecting the rest of us.
"Once again, this is
Meghan, and Im out."
"GILBERT: Because therapy
and medication have
failed to help Caitlin,"
"one last option
remains open to her,"
one that might
surprise many people.
"Most of us know it as
electric shock treatment,"
but its actually called
"electroconvulsive
therapy, or ECT."
"For 70 years, ECTs been
used to treat severe cases"
of depression that
havent responded
to psychotherapy or medication.
"As movies like One Flew Over
the Cuckoos Nest remind us,"
ECT was once a primitive
and painful procedure.
But technological advances have
made it far less traumatic
and virtually pain-free.
ECT is a highly effective
treatment for depression.
But no one really
understands why.
Do we know if ECT
is more effective
than the antidepressants in
causing the neurogenesis?
Ronald Dumans studies
might offer a clue.
"Working with rats, hes found
that ECT is even more effective"
than antidepressants in
stimulating cell growth.
Tell me what Im looking at.
"Theyre beautiful,"
but theyre more
significant than that.
DUMAN: Here were showing that
the cells that give rise
to new neurons are actually
increased in number by
electroconvulsive therapy.
This is really quite amazing.
Theres just a lot more
of these blue cells
on this side than on that side.
The example that were
showing here is the effect
of chronic electroconvulsive
therapy; that ECT leads
"to a very dramatic increase
in numbers of new neurons,"
"much greater than what we see
with antidepressant treatment,"
with a chemical
antidepressant treatment.
GILBERT: Although
experiments with rats cant
necessarily be generalized
"to human beings, these results
do offer an intriguing insight"
"into how ECT might
work, and why."
"In the early morning
hours of July 7,"
Tricia drives Caitlin
to the hospital
for her first round
of treatment with ECT.
You all right?
Should have brought your pillow.
TRICIA: Caitlin herself was
the one who made the decision
that the life that
she was leading was
not how she wanted to be.
"So, I... I was taking
a cue from Caitlin."
"I remember her
screaming at one point,"
"""You dont understand how
horrible it is to be caught"
"""in this brain of mine,
this brain that doesnt work,"
"""and youll never know
how awful this is,"
"and I want you to fix this!"""
She would strike out at
me at unexpected times.
Nothing I could do was
good enough for her.
"But I knew in my
heart that, I mean,"
"shes such a sweet,
thoughtful kid,"
and she had told me how much
she loved me at one point
in her life-- and points during
this whole process-- that I knew
that she really didnt mean it.
NURSE: Welcome.
"TRICIA AND CAITLIN: Hi, Brad."
BRAD: How are you?
TRICIA: Good to see you again.
BRAD: Nice to see you.
"TRICIA: Um, I was the one
who said to the doctor,
""What about ECT?"""
I just kept researching
what kind of things
help with depression.
So Ive kind of put it out there.
"So, hows your mood now?"
I take it your moods been down?
"Yeah, its been down."
Do you have any periods
in which you feel good?
In which your mood feels good?
"Not really, I would say. No."
TRICIA: We definitely had a lot
"of reservations,
because we knew"
"that it was a serious
process and procedure,"
but Caitlin was
severely depressed.
Any thoughts of suicide?
Uh-uh.
"Not even to the
point where, uh..."
you wish you were dead?
CAITLIN: Sometimes. Okay.
I just felt like nothing
was going to stop us
from getting to
the solution here.
"Uh, do you understand
this is treatment"
for depression beyond the meds?
CAITLIN: Yeah.
You got some hope
that thisll work?
Yeah.
"Dads going to say
good-bye, okay?"
Im going to be around.
(Bob murmuring)
"CAITLIN: ""Functioning"" is..."
its like a four-letter
word to me.
"I mean, its good,
youre functioning,"
but thats no way to live.
And its no way to
continue going on.
Its the worst thing
in the world for me.
"WOMAN: Bob. Good
morning. How you doing
here, Caitlin? You okay?"
TECH: Your anesthesia team
here taking care of you today.
Were going to hook you
up to some monitors here.
Can we do a time-out?
Yeah. Okay.
"Can you tell us what
your name is, Caitlin?"
Caitlin Davies.
What are you having done today?
Im having ECT.
Okay. Everybody concur?
We concur.
"Okay, all right."
Turn your head
towards me. Great.
MARCUS: ECT is perhaps one
of the most misunderstood
treatments for depression.
I think many people view
ECT with an eye toward
"One Flew Over
the Cuckoos Nest,"
a sort of archaic
medieval treatment
that they cant fathom
anyone receiving.
"In point of fact, ECT
is one of the treatments"
that turns around difficult
depression more quickly
"than many other treatments,"
"and for moderate-to-severe
depression,"
"frankly, is a
treatment of choice,"
particularly if an
individual has failed
the traditional
psychotherapeutics
and pharmacological treatments.
You okay with that?
Yeah. Okay.
"MARCUS: Most of the time,
anesthesia is present"
so the individual does
not have any memory
of the procedure itself.
"They will remember some of
the preoperative procedures,"
"and often will remember waking
up in the recovery room,"
but otherwise they have no
memory of the event itself.
"MAN: Okay, I think were
ready, guys. Lets go ahead."
"DOCTOR: Okay, go
ahead, please."
Go ahead.
(device beeping)
(steady tone)
"So, shes still
seizing right here."
(device beeping)
(device beeps)
Are you okay if we take these?
"Yes, thats great. Okay."
"DOCTOR: So, she got
the Zofran, too?"
She did get the Zofran 4.
(device beeps)
"Shes slowly waking up,
probably with the extra..."
"All right, Caitlin, were going
to take you to recovery now."
MARCUS: The problem with
letting depression linger
is we know that there are
subtle changes in the brain
such that its an illness
that becomes harder to treat
"as you... as you let it take
its course, so to speak."
"The other major problem
with depression,"
"especially in young people,
is that you lose years"
of that individuals life.
Human beings change a great
deal during adolescence.
"So while somebody is
struggling with depression,"
"theyre unable to make
the social gains,"
"the intimacy gains,
the academic gains"
that are so necessary when
somebody is developing
from an adolescent
to a young adult.
"So, it essentially robs people
of years of their lives"
during a period that
theyre struggling
with these internal symptoms.
"TRICIA: Caitlin,
can you hear me?"
Im done?
Youre done. Its all over.
It went really well.
(mutters)
"Yeah, its all over.
Yeah, were good."
You want to just
get a little sip?
Its going to be a little hard
for me to do that.
Take a sip.
You dont have to sit
up all the way. Okay.
Its ginger ale.
Does that hurt?
You want water?
GILBERT: The
doctors told Caitlin
that the average course
of ECT is nine sessions.
But the number of treatments
Caitlin will have
depends on how she responds.
"Hi, its Caitlin."
"Um, I think
treatments going okay."
"Um, I wish I could see a
little more improvement."
"I... you know, I saw a
little bit, like, last week."
"I saw a little bit of an
improvement, where, you know,"
"for the first time, I mean, I
was like... I was really happy."
I was just happy.
"Didnt have, like,
anything going on."
I was just happy.
(sniffles)
And I wish that would
have stayed longer.
Not where I am right now.
"GILBERT: Several weeks later,"
Caitlins family is starting
to realize that ECT is not
going to be the miracle cure
for which they all were hoping.
TRICIA: Caitlin came
home from treatment--
this wouldve been the
seventh treatment--
"and it was, at that moment, the
worst treatment day wed had."
"We had been told that maybe
after about six treatments,"
she would start to feel better.
And so she had it in her head
that she would feel better.
"So she came home, and she
was angry and she was..."
felt horrible.
And I finally lost it with her.
And I made this little comment
that she needed to
try harder to move on.
And she absolutely
lost it with me.
She started screaming
that I didnt know how hard
she had been trying
and how awful this was
and that she didnt want
me to be anywhere near her
"and screamed at me to
leave the room, so I did."
"And I think what happened was
that she had felt better,"
and she was so upset about not
feeling better all the time.
And this is one of the
things I think is such--
"I-I dont want to
blame the doctors,"
but no one ever
prepared us for this--
ups and downs quite so
much at the right times.
"GILBERT: Despite the
disappointments,"
the doctors suggest
moving forward
with additional treatments...
as many as three times a week.
"By mid-August, something
seems to be changing."
"MEGHAN: Hello, its Meghan."
CAITLIN: And Caitlin.
"MEGHAN: Its been a while since
our last, uh, video entry."
"For the first time,
I actually, um..."
I remember just for the
first time being happy
"for longer than, you know..."
(sniffles)
"I just remember being
happy for longer than,"
"you know, like, five seconds."
"And it was just the
most wonderful thing,"
because I hadnt
felt happy like that
"for an extended
period of time,"
in as long as I could remember.
"And it was just the most
amazing thing for me,"
because I did feel happy.
And it did last longer
than for a second.
"And it was just
really, really nice."
"And, I mean, its still
really hard for me"
to get moving.
"But that was just
really great, because"
I... go off to school
in less than a month.
"So its looking good,
and I guess well do"
another entry later in the week.
And well fill you in
more. Probably tomorrow.
"So once again, this
is Meghan. Caitlin."
"MEGHAN: Um, and well catch
you guys up later this week."
Bye.
Happy?
Sit up straight.
I am.
(laughs)
I hate when you do that.
"I know. Well, look at me."
"GILBERT: Shortly after
her 16th treatment,"
Caitlin tells her family she
feels ready to try college.
Why should I let you
go to school tomorrow?
Because you... Im
scared to death.
(both laugh)
You have to let me try.
But how can I let you go?
Cause Im doing so much better.
Why do you want to leave?
(both laugh)
Im worried to death.
I know. Tell me why
I shouldnt worry.
Because Ill do fine.
Why?
Because Im responsible.
"And Im a strong person, and..."
TRICIA: Okay. And you
feeling up to this?
"CAITLIN: Im feeling--
yes, Im feeling up to it."
TRICIA: Okay.
All right. (laughs)
Just wanted to know.
(laughs)
All right.
Youre scared?
"Yes, Im scared."
Are you scared?
A little bit.
Just a little?
Ill be fine. Youll be fine.
Okay.
(both laugh)
Ill be fine.
"All right, thats all
I needed to hear."
That youll be fine.
All right?
"All right, good girl."
Oops.
Meghan!
TRICIA: Were headed to school.
"Im ready for this little
birdie to fly the nest,"
broken wing and all.
Its just going to be
such a huge leap for her.
"Thats the biggest,
scariest part."
But Caitlin is in great shape.
She has really come
through this experience
so much better.
"The doctor said that her
assessment was wonderful,"
that shes way out of any
kind of depression level.
"Um, so its very exciting."
"All right, now really
hug each other."
What does that mean? What...
TRICIA: I dont want anybody to
think that going through ECT
is going to be an easy solution.
There was just so much
pain and-and struggle
that went through that.
Its not like taking a
drug and going to bed.
"It was just, it
was just awful."
"Bye, Caitlin."
Love you. Have fun.
"You, too."
TRICIA: So I think
she just really
"showed her inner strength
throughout this process,"
cause it was very difficult.
"Im really in a good spot, too."
Im really happy for her.
GILBERT: Everyone
wants to feel happy.
Happy all the time.
But nature has a
different plan for us.
"Our brains were
designed for survival,"
and the negative
emotions they create
are vital to that mission.
We need to feel afraid...
sad...
"angry, sometimes."
But we need to
feel those emotions
in just the right amount.
"Too little is bad,
and too much is worse."
Science reminds us
that were of two minds:
a rational brain
thats relatively new
and an emotional brain
thats relatively old.
Sometimes emotion
overwhelms reason.
Sometimes reason
outwits emotion.
But its the endless
struggle between these two
"that makes life
such a wonderful,"
scary and mysterious ride.